Warm greetings. Welcome, everyone. Welcome. So we'll begin as we usually begin, which is
to very intentionally and consciously awaken our natural goodness, our bodhicitta, the heart-mind
of enlightenment. So we'll just brightly turn that on with full of confidence and joy and
enthusiasm, and then we'll really kind of orient this time together, that it'll be of
ultimate benefit for all beings, both bringing them immediate happiness in all ways right
now, and then also very soon the enlightenment and freedom from all suffering and its causes
as well. So we'll just turn on bodhicitta right now. Thanks so much. So early homage
to the lineage masters, homage to Buddhist Sakimuni, homage to Guru Rinpoche, homage to
this stainless golden mountain range of pristine lineage masters. So today we're going to dive
deeply into the middle-wave view, which is in one way, just kind of by an honest assessment,
we're kind of showing up really late to the party. This has been taught by the Buddhist
Sakimuni for 2500 years ago, and it's continually been taught and practiced by this lineage
of masters, and it's actually perfect timing right now. We've all arrived to receive these
precious golden nugget teachings that have been preserved uninterruptedly without any
mistaken errors or kind of mixing in opinions and conceptualizations. So here we are, we
get to be together for a short little window of time and discuss something as profound
and vast as the middle-wave view, which is really the elixir of all the troubles we'll
ever experience and all the different suffering we've ever gone through. So we'll just take
a minute to pause and really like honor that, that we're really kind of midstream here.
Everything that we're doing here together is like because of the kindness and the perseverance
of these lineage masters, these elders and ancestors that have really persevered to fully
reveal their true nature. So that's why we have this opportunity now, and it's always
important to really reconnect with that lineage and the blessings of those masters and the
living lineage wisdom that they worked so hard to realize and also to preserve and continue
to make available for us now. So this is a really, really big topic, and we're going
to do kind of like a highlight reel, okay, of the Madhyamaka middle-wave view. So we'll
just jump right in. There's two approaches to the Buddha Dharma. They both have the same
purpose to reveal all obscurations and to totally remove these obscurations and fully reveal
our natural goodness qualities. So that's what all the teachings, 84,000 teachings of
the Buddha are designed to do, remove the temporary obscurations, the veils of ignorance
that are covering up our natural goodness, and to fully disclose or reveal the innate
goodness qualities we have. All the teachings are designed for this purpose. And there's
two general approaches towards these teachings, and one is the approach of the scholar, and
the other is the approach of the meditator. And both of these are legitimate paths, and
people of all types and varieties have taken both of these paths and achieved full enlightenment
and fruition by applying the techniques and the teachings according to their own dispositions,
whether they want to do a more scholarly approach or a more practice-oriented direct meditator
approach. So either of these paths are fully available to us. And as a ningma school, actually
we're asked by Gurumache and these lineage masters to always do both together. We call
this study and practice. We're honoring the scriptural lineage as well as the practice
or realization lineage. These always go hand in hand in the ningma school of Tibetan Buddhism.
And so it's not so much like a... It's something we'll always have to check in on both sides
of this. And what a scholastic approach generally does is starts more with what's outside, what's
more obvious, tangible, exterior, objective. And then looking closely, closely, closely,
it gets more and more inside till it kind of had the resounding question of like, how
is my subjective engagement, this knower, this awareness, how is it influencing what
is known, this appearance. So the scholastic approach is a little more gradual, but it's
also very thorough. We start outside with what's very obvious and tangible. We look
at it closely and gradually we come to investigate the looker, who's actually performing that
investigation. On the other hand, the meditator approach jumps directly into their own awareness.
How is my cognizance, my mind, this awareness, this consciousness, what is it? How does it
work? How does it influence experience? What is its nature? These are direct meditator
kind of questions or inquiries that we're... We have all these sets of teachings to jump
into and look for ourselves. The Buddha encouraged that. Both of these approaches to very
thoroughly
check what's going on here. So whether we're looking at what's outside, that's generally
called ontology being, a study of being of what is, or epistemology knowing, how do we
know what is. Either of these approaches are legitimate paths in Buddhism and they actually
go hand in hand. Ontology and epistemology, the study of being and knowing of the knower
and the known are always together.
In Buddhism in general, and in the Nyingma school in particular,
study and practice always go hand in hand.
So we can take either of these approaches.
And the great compassionate kindness teacher,
Buddha Shakyamuni, was so generous
in how he made the teachings available to us,
to our readiness, to our dispositions, to our faculties,
to our preferences, to our habits, to our biases,
to our prejudices, to our ways of being stuck
and way of being open.
He was so kind.
And they say there's three general phases
that the Buddha taught.
One is called the phase of no analysis.
The second is called the phase of slight analysis.
The third is called the phase of thorough analysis.
So at the first level of the Buddha's teachings,
the no analysis level, the Buddha just
agreed with what was commonly held to be true.
For example, there is suffering.
The Buddha said this is commonly held belief.
OK, I won't analyze that any further.
I'll agree, there's suffering.
So what are we going to do about it?
What is the cause?
Is it possible to fully remove suffering,
the cause of suffering?
What's the path?
What are the steps, the tools we have
to perform and engage to actually discover
the cessation of suffering?
This is the level of no analysis.
The Buddha just agreed with our worldly kind
of common, mundane ideas, what we consider common sense.
There is a person.
We're in a building.
The Buddha didn't challenge any of this.
He didn't-- no analysis, no further investigation
on this level of the teachings.
OK, the second level is called slight analysis.
And this is refuting our grasping onto the existence
of things like suffering, house, me, person, path,
enlightenment.
The Buddha did a slight analysis.
And he said, there is no such thing as true existence.
I don't truly exist.
You don't truly exist.
The path doesn't truly exist.
The house doesn't truly exist.
Enlightenment does not truly exist.
So the Buddha used conceptions to look more closely,
little more analysis, to help remove our grasping
onto this fixed tension.
We really believe these things are happening.
I'm suffering.
I need relief from suffering.
There's a bad thing happening.
There's a good thing I want.
The Buddha said, look closely, analyze, loosen.
Loosen the view.
Open the awareness.
Let a little more curiosity in.
Look a little more closely.
If we look really closely, we won't really
find a substantially existent permanent thing anywhere.
The idea of a singular, independent, permanent entity
is complete fiction.
Everything has parts.
Everything arises in dependence on other things.
And everything is impermanent.
Sip, singular, independent, permanent.
There's no such thing that exists in all of the universe.
If we think it, feel it exists, that's one thing.
If we look more closely, the little more analysis,
we won't be able to find that.
It is unfindable.
And that leads us to the third phase
of the Buddha's teaching, thorough analysis.
So at this phase, the Buddha wasn't just
saying use concepts to kind of understand,
having a better conceptual map, a more refined, intelligent kind
of way to argument or to kind of locate my experience.
But to actually be in non-conceptual wisdom
awareness, not duality consciousness,
not dualistic mind, not subject and object,
not a framework that has a me in here
and a something other than me out there,
a subject and an object.
Before that layer of filtering happens
in my own immediate experience, before that happens,
recognize how the mind is with prajna.
Wisdom, non-conceptual wisdom awareness.
Unborn, unceasing, by nature like the sky,
experienced by self-reflexive awarenesses,
discerning, pristine cognition.
This is the great master, Shantrakshita,
added to the beginning of the heart sutra.
It's pointing to the middle way view, the lived experience
of what it's like to be in non-conceptual wisdom
awareness.
This is the lived experience of the middle way view.
Unborn, unceasing, by nature like the sky,
experienced by self-reflexive awarenesses,
discerning, pristine cognition.
So this is the topic that we're discussing today,
the middle way view.
So if we look, take a kind of step back
from this no analysis, slight analysis, thorough analysis,
the ways that Buddha generally made his teachings a little
more direct to the true nature, the way enlightened beings
experience things, not the way deluded sentient beings,
like myself, experience things, the way enlightened beings
experience things, this first turning of the wheel of Dharma,
the four noble truths, cause and effect, interdependence.
That is this no analysis level.
The second turning is called rangtong, empty of self,
empty of fixed self, empty of fixed identity, rangtong.
These are the heart sutra teachings, the prajnaparamita
sutras that the Buddha gave.
This is slight analysis and thorough analysis.
The Buddha both said when we look closer,
nothing fits those conceptual frameworks.
Nothing truly exists in the way we feel it might.
If we look even closer, we'll pop into absolute awareness,
what we call prajna, non-conceptual wisdom
awareness, this is thorough analysis.
So in the Madhyamaka, our middleweight teachings,
this is saying the first part, slight analysis is going beyond
all-- sorry, slight analysis is lacking or empty
of intrinsic existence or inherent existence,
no fixed identity.
There is no such thing as a fixed property, identity,
pattern, person, place, thing.
That is mistaken belief.
It's just a false belief.
Those things don't exist.
Then the Buddha so kindly said, oh, we
might grasp onto non-existence.
They don't exist.
Nothing exists.
No eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue, no body, no mind.
So nothing.
The Buddha said, no.
Third turning-- or sorry, this is in the thorough analysis.
Look at, in your own awareness, how it functions when it's not
conceptualizing at all.
And this, the middleweight teachings,
say, going beyond conceptual designation, non-conceptual,
before conceptual layering happens, being wisdom.
It's called natural mind, ordinary mind.
There's different-- the Buddha taught so many ways about this.
Then the third turning teachings are,
what is it actually like when we experience
non-conceptual wisdom awareness?
What's that like?
What is it not?
But what is it like?
Then this is the third turning teachings.
Shintong, empty of other, empty of what's
other than the natural qualities of mind.
Rongtong is empty of self.
There's no fixed identity.
That's second turning.
Third turning is empty of other.
All the adventitious, temporary obscurations,
when they're removed, what's left?
The Buddha taught-- the tatagatagarbha,
the Buddha nature's left.
This is the middleweight view.
This is how our mind functions with all
of its beautiful qualities, love, compassion, and wisdom.
All the extraordinary capacities and qualities of enlightened
wisdom awareness is Buddha activities.
They're all kind of coming from this third turning
of the wheel of dharma, Shintong, teachings
on the Buddha nature.
Then fourth turning, some people say, is Vajrayana techniques.
There's a big, long-term, centuries-old big discussion
about what's the definitive teaching of a Buddha.
How do Buddhas experience things?
How do they kind of, in a way, cater
to the individual limitations of sentient beings?
Not provisional.
Not a temporary way that's like a stepping stone
for beings to use.
But how do Buddhas experience things?
Definitive truth.
The great master Jangang Mipham Rinpoche
said the definitive teaching of the Buddha
is the union of the second and third turnings
of Rongtong and Shintong, empty in self and empty of other.
Empty of any fixation at all.
That's called nondual wisdom.
And what is that like when it's empty of all the other things
that are unnatural and it's just entirely natural?
This is Buddha nature.
So this is the groundless ground.
This is the middleweight view.
There's no big debate over whether second turnings
are more definitive and third turnings more definitive.
Their union is what's definitive,
according to the great master Jangang Mipham Rinpoche.
As our kind, compassionate, and extraordinary teachers,
Venerable Kempa Rinpoche has taught in their Shirdra series.
All these books-- there's so many books here.
They've laid all these things out extensively, so kindly.
All according to the great master Longchenpa and Mipham
Rinpoche and these great lineage masters.
These are really just waiting to be opened up and pursued
and it's such a delight.
This is a treasure trove of teachings for us.
We can, if we want to take an eight-year program
to become a Kempo or a Kenmo or a Geshe or a Gesheima,
21 years.
We can also, if we want something more suitable
to the wild, contemporary, I never have any time,
21st century, we can look at these books
and it's like a very extensive highlights
from these great masters that it is still
the essence of both the scholastic path
and the practitioner path.
And the key points we have to have in order for our practice
to stay on track to follow in the footsteps of the Buddha.
I'm just giving a quick highlight reel here.
This is a very extensive thing.
Right?
I've said things that are totally revolutionary
that don't make any sense in an ordinary view.
There's no person.
There's no path.
Wisdom awareness.
I mean, you see that on the evening news.
Are they talking about anything like that?
There's no suffering, no end of suffering, no birth,
no old age, no sickness, no death.
All we get is birth, old age, sickness, and death
on the news.
Right?
That's the level of no analysis, superficial,
typical distorted ordinary sentient being ideas.
And we actually believe them.
And so the Buddha taught us so kindly how to look more closely
and come out of such a distorted perception, which when we
believe it feels so real.
We have this entire path at our disposal
to really go through systematically
and look at ourself, look at our experience,
and free ourselves from this trouble that our own mind keeps
causing itself.
It's the only way out.
This is the only way out.
I'm not saying Buddhism is the only way out.
I'm saying this level of inquiry,
following through and actually refining
our conceptualization, having a more clear discernment,
more valid cognition, is the only way to freedom.
Everything else is a band-aid.
We can save this planet a million times over,
but once the sun no longer produces heat, it's gone.
We're gone.
We can have a good stretch of some,
I don't know, 10 billion years or so.
It's a big stretch.
Evolutionarily, it's a big stretch.
In terms of all the kalpas the Buddha taught,
this is like a tiny little dewdrop in the ocean of time.
We've been going in this ocean of suffering forever,
literally, beginningless time.
This is the only way to freedom.
Doing this inquiry ourselves, it's the only way.
That is definitely a lion's roar of Buddhist acumenity.
So while this may be seen philosophical,
that's actually quite experiential,
and it really does alleviate suffering, our own suffering,
and how we give harm beings a little less in the process.
We become more compassionate and more kind.
So I'm just really quickly jumping through these highlight
points.
I'm in no way saying this is all the condensed exhaustive
explanation or something of a eight-year program,
21-year program.
I'm just saying highlight points that we have to really
get familiar with to practice and absorb these teachings
thoroughly, because these are lived experiences that we
actually believe in right now.
This is not just about historical figures
and some lineage masters way back when.
We really believe suffering is truly existing.
I do.
I really believe I'm here.
I really believe my story.
I really believe in concepts, certain concepts,
like time and space.
I really believe that.
The Buddha said that's all false.
Relative truth is artificial, fabricated, deceptive,
delusory, like a husk that falls off
of what's truly the core.
This is all false.
So then he gave us a path to gradually,
if we want to look, gradually open up
to consider the truth of this teaching
so we can actually be free, free of our own self-deception,
free of not seeing our own unborn, sky-like nature
of mind, the middle way view.
All these teachings are about how to recognize and abide
in the middle way view.
So I'll lay some more foundation.
The Buddha taught four philosophical schools.
And like all of these teachings we're going over
and the nine yanas according to the Nyingma school,
they all lead to another step.
It's called yarden, geared forward.
Each step, we're on it, leans us into the next step.
That step, we're on that, leans us into the next step.
They're geared to the next.
That's how the sequence of the nine yanas work.
They're not against each other.
It naturally extends into the next step.
Each subyana or subvehicle, sublevel,
it'll gradually open up into the next level
if we keep that inquiry going.
The Buddha said that's just how reality functions.
And each step is a little closer, a little more detailed,
a little more complete, a little more
expressive of the true nature of the middle way
view of how enlightened beings perceive things.
Each yana does that.
It's a little more directly from our own pristine valid
cognition.
And it's a little less relying on our distorted habitual
dualistic consciousness.
Each yana is higher that way, more inclusive.
It's greater.
It includes more of the true nature.
The techniques more directly jump us or pop us
into our true nature.
That's how the yana sequence works.
This first school is called Vibhashika,
great exposition school.
This is like a so-called foundational Buddhism
or Hinayana approach.
And there's many beliefs they hold.
But one belief they hold that I want to highlight here
is there are two things in life, mind and body.
Call it material, non-material.
And each of these are made up of two things.
Body is made up of irreducible particles of time
and irreducible particles of physical units of space.
That's matter.
Teeny, teeny, teeny, teeny, teeny, tiny,
cannot be split any further, units of time and space.
And then mind is made up of two things,
indivisible units of mind and the felt sense of self, me.
One is like, what actually is the mind?
These indivisible units of mind.
And what experience is that?
Me, my sense of me, felt sense of self.
The Vibhashika school, great exposition school,
believed this.
This is really close to like a contemporary modern science.
There's still the contemporary modern science.
We're looking for the smallest unit, the smallest particle
that makes up all of other aggregate reality.
Now it's contemporary to think of it as strings,
11 dimensional strings.
The Buddha said to keep looking.
And so the strings are going to dissolve too,
dissolve under analysis.
You'll find smaller units.
Keep looking, keep looking, keep looking.
Eventually we'll get to irreducible units
of time, space, mind, and a sense of self.
And that's everything that exists,
according to Vibhashika school.
This is way beyond what we see on the news
or what we talk about in our daily conversations.
And the Buddha said, you can experience this.
In the Pali tradition, it's called Bhanga.
The felt experience that you're just this vibrating aggregate
of indivisible particles can experience it.
So this is really much more subtle
than our typical ordinary average way of experiencing things.
Because it actually can be experienced,
not just theoretically asserted.
Or, you know, we haven't seen strings, you know.
They're all, it's like math, more or less math.
Mathematically, we need strings to make the math work.
So largely this is just like looking outside.
I haven't started looking at the looker that much yet.
This is a, quantum physics is 100 years old now.
It's not some new thing on the block.
This is a century old.
The Buddha taught more subtle than this 2,500 years ago.
I'm just saying, not that science is bad,
but science has a lot to learn from Buddhism.
If scientists like logic
and they like a kind of objective verification, that's great.
They can come and hang out with the Buddhists
and learn about that.
But Buddhists have more than that.
That's when we get to the next school,
Sultrontica school, the Sutra school.
This is the Buddha taught.
The Buddha taught all these schools as our mind opens,
then the Buddha taught the next step,
geared forward to the next view.
The Sultrontica school, they kind of,
so there's so many points here, you can go over,
but like a fundamental distinction
between Sultrontica school and Vibhashika.
Sultrontica school, they think,
okay, so say there's these irreducible particles out there
of time and space and mind and sense of self.
That these little physical things out there,
we never directly perceive them.
How can mind perceive matter?
Because they're fundamentally different things.
Mind and matter are material and immaterial.
How can they ever understand each other or come in contact?
Because they're of different types.
Makes no sense for them to contact actually,
in Buddhist logic.
So what the Sultrontica school asserted
is that we never actually directly experience matter.
We only ever directly experience our image of matter.
Like there are these irreducible particles
that are so tiny you can never directly perceive them.
They're imperceptible.
But we only ever experience our cognition,
our mental overlay, our conceptual construction
of the matter.
Never directly experience matter, ever.
We just experience our projection.
All we ever experience is our projection.
That's the Sultrontica.
There are these little irreducible bits of space and time.
We never directly experience them.
We just have a generalized overlay
that are our own projections.
So these are both so-called
the foundational Buddhism philosophical schools.
They also believe that to achieve enlightenment
is a very rare thing that happens.
It's a very special kind of being like Gautama Buddha,
who could achieve that.
The pinnacle realization for most beings is our hot hood.
They refuted the existence of Alayavijnana,
the ground storehouse consciousness.
They don't believe in the Bhumis, the five past.
They refute three Kayas.
They don't believe in these higher teachings.
The Buddha didn't teach those in the sutras.
And these sutras that they're focusing on.
So then they're just following the words of the Buddha,
specifically the Sultrontica view.
They really didn't want to mix any other commentaries.
They just wanted to try to go directly
with the words of the Buddha.
And they only relied on very specific teachings of the Buddha.
They were more kind of available at that time.
So then what we get the next school
is called a Yogachara or Chitamatra or mind only.
So the next step here is worth taking this time
because we can do a really general thing here
and save some time if we know some certain key points.
I mean, in my view, that's my experience.
So Yogachara or mind only.
So Altrontica says all we ever experience is our projections.
It's called a representational theory of mind.
We only ever experienced a representation.
We never experienced the actual thing,
just our version of the thing.
That's all we ever experienced.
Yogachara or mind only says,
we assume there's a thing there that's being represented.
That's not true.
There's no thing there.
It's all projection through and through, mind only.
There is only mental.
So there's no kind of a big problem
of how mind and matter meet.
There's only mind.
It's all projection.
Mind only school.
I say, how could it all be mind?
How can mind interact with mind?
How can there be multiple minds?
'Cause we think so much were rooted
in these tangible material things, right?
I am.
But my thoughts influence each other all the time.
So do my emotions.
My anger leads to my hatred, leads to my jealousy,
leads to my hatred, leads to my self doubt.
This is a constant chain of mental things
influence each other all batting around
in the little cage up there.
Mind only school says it's only mind.
There's nothing out there, just mind.
That thing that we think is out there
causing our projection, it's not there.
That's a mistaken belief, misapprehension.
So mind only school has three big points.
They call the three natures.
One, imaginary nature.
Two, the dependent arising nature.
Three, the truly established nature.
(speaking in foreign language)
Imaginary nature is totally false 100%.
There's nothing that exists.
It's called, in common examples,
there's son of a barren woman, horn of a rabbit.
The other one's ego.
Ego is a completely false imaginary conception.
There's no actual referent in reality that that refers to.
It's completely false.
It's not a dream.
It's a totally wrong view.
There's no fixed entity.
The Sutra schools believe this,
and so does mind only schools.
So does Manyama school.
So does all the Bhadriyana schools, like the lineages.
That's imaginary.
So one, we have to remove the imaginary things.
The completely fictitious distortions we have
that have no actual coherence
with anything that's actually happening.
Like ego, sense of me, totally false.
The second dependent arising, okay,
we eliminate some of that.
What is happening?
Well, there's these things interacting with each other,
cause and effect.
There are apparent projections,
mental habits that are interplaying and causing results.
What are they happening in?
They say it's actually like the truly established nature.
In mind only school, this is called nondual mind.
In the path of mind only school,
what happens is nondual mind is more fully revealed
as our impure dependent arising nature is purified.
As our understanding of cause and effect gets more accurate
in the kind of totally false, artificial ways
we understand cause and effect are gradually removed,
then we get a purified experience,
which actually just means more natural, less obscured.
And then we fully reveal the,
we kind of have the finally established true nature.
100% unmistaken.
So they talk about this as the alaya being purified,
the ground, the swear house consciousness.
It has all these temporary delusions.
It's where all these experiences
since infinite beginningless time
have been stored as these habits.
Receives every single sense datum,
every percept, every concept, every perception,
every conception, inputs it there.
And then as the causes and conditions arise,
the habits are activated.
And then our projection is colored and textured
in certain ways based on what particular habits
are happening right now that we actually implanted
in our alaya consciousness a long time ago or more recently.
And gradually these distorted habits through practice,
they're not falsely reifying.
They're not falsely holding on to our experience.
These mistaken habits, the imaginary ones dissolve
and removed, then the mistaken cause and effect,
dependent arising habits are gradually removed
until they're gone.
And what's left is the truly established nature,
non dual mind.
That's a mind only school.
And then we get to the middle way view, Madhyamaka.
So the mind only school, or sorry, the middle way, Madhyamaka.
There's two, this is the Buddha taught
in a Prasamparamita sutras, the Madhyamaka.
It's commonly like distilled into the heart sutra teachings.
This is second turning.
Some people call it, some great masters call it.
The second turning is a direct teaching
of Prasamparamita of mind only.
Third turning is the hidden meaning of Prasamparamita.
Middle way view, what is the middle?
Oftentimes we think of middle as our left, right, middle.
Left, right, center.
This is not the middle way.
I think it's more helpful to think of left, right,
go up a level.
So it's up leveled into unmistaken awareness.
It's called prajna.
We're not playing the games of left and right,
of binary games.
It's not in dualistic consciousness anymore.
What the middle way view is pointing out
is unobstructed non dual wisdom awareness or prajna.
It's free from the extremes of playing all these games,
holding onto one side against the other side.
That's what mind only, or that's what middle way view
is trying to point us into,
trying to pop us into our natural intelligence
that's beyond the four extremes.
So their big critique of the mind only school
is mind only school, those really kind of adherence
to that view, they really believe in truly existent mind.
There is mind, it's happening right now.
This is all mind.
That's all there is, mind.
The Madhyamakans are the middle way practitioners.
There's two general types of Madhyamaka,
the verbal aspect or scripture,
and then the realization aspect or the meaning.
So there's all the teachings on Madhyamaka,
and then there's the actual direct experience
of those teachings.
So there's the theory, and then there's the experience.
And mind only was taught,
or you could say popularized by Nagarjuna,
'cause the Buddha taught mind only,
or sorry, I keep saying mind only.
The Buddha taught the middle way view.
The Buddha taught Santantika, Vibhachika,
mind only, middle way, all the Vajrayana.
But Nagarjuna popularized it, these middle way teachings.
And that became two streams.
The one stream was saying this,
more this simple way to put it.
One, okay, so if the main point of mind only
is to just be in a type of awareness
that doesn't play any binary games,
totally fluid and flexible, takes no fixed position,
non-dual wisdom awareness, the middle way.
That's what's being pointed out in the middle way teachings,
beyond conceptual designation.
There's two ways to do this.
One is we use relative stepping stones
to gradually introduce and reintroduce this in our mind.
The other is more sudden.
It says every conceptual position is fundamentally mistaken.
Don't play the games of concepts.
Just see the true nature, absolute truth.
So this stepping stone approach of the middle way view,
that is two subdivisions.
One, it says, you know, we're like people struggling here,
so like we need to use some relative truth.
You can't just refute all the relative positions
and say they're all wrong.
Which one's better?
Is there one that's better for a practitioner?
So there's the one that believes in the sutra school,
these irreducible particles, Sultrantika Madhyamaka.
And then there's one that uses more mind only school
on the relative level.
That's called Yogachara Madhyamaka, our mind only middle way.
That was expounded by the great master, Shantarakshita.
I said that was taught by also Gurumache.
That was what was brought,
that's how these teachings were brought to Tibet
in the eighth century.
Yogachara Madhyamaka.
These use relative stepping stones.
They engage what's happening on the relative phenomenal world.
What's the most helpful way according to these views?
One says irreducible particles.
There's all these tiny little bleeping things
that are making up these big aggregate things.
The other says, actually, it's just mind.
That's the relative.
That's the best relative description
that's most helpful to pop yourself
out of all conceptual designation
and recognize wisdom or awareness.
These are the gradual stepping stone approaches
of middle way.
The more direct one called Prasangaka Madhyamaka.
And what it does is it self-destructs every position.
And it doesn't do that by banging it with some other,
with our usual ways of conversing now,
which is basically to like hit people with bats.
This is degenerate age.
What Prasangaka Madhyamaka uses,
use the own logic of each position.
And if you keep using their logic,
eventually you get to a self-contradiction.
Reductio ad absurdum.
Every single relative position has that.
Every single one.
So, Nagarjan is famous for this tetralemma
that undoes the four extremes.
The extreme of this is, or this is not.
This both is and is not.
This neither is nor is not.
In logic terms, a, negation of a.
Both a and negation of a.
Neither negation, neither a and negation of a.
So these are the four logical positions
that it covers exhaustively all relative positions possible.
And Nagarjan taught, this is, they're all,
they all are limited, they're all diluted.
They're all fundamentally self-contradictory.
There's a thing, there's not the thing.
There's both a thing and not the thing.
There's neither thing nor not the thing.
They're all self-contradictory.
So when Nagarjan is fundamental wisdom of the middle way,
amongst other teachings, he refuted these thoroughly.
Why did he do that?
He said, don't play games
with conceptual relative designation.
They're all fundamentally flawed.
Just recognize absolute truth.
Be in the realized meaning of Madhyamaka.
Don't just play word games.
Don't just gradually use kind of distorted ideas
and less distorted until it's not distorted.
Just go right to undistorted, non-deceptive, absolute truth.
Don't play with fabrication, relative truth,
fabricated artificial reality.
Just ignite, turn on right now, wisdom awareness.
That's called absolute bodhichitta.
Just turn it on now.
Don't play all these gradual games.
There's too many beings suffering.
They need our help too much.
Just wake up.
Right?
Zen likes this approach.
Stick.
Just come out.
Wake up.
But then they use all these rituals and stepping stones
and you walk this way and clean the bowl this way
and all that.
That's all Svaatranthakam and Yamaka.
There's all kinds of conceptual supports.
So this is how, this comes down to the middle way view.
Say in one way, when Yamaka is,
if we're just looking at refuting inherent existence,
there's no fixed identity, that's conceptual.
'Cause we're still using concepts to realize that.
But then the direct meaning of Madhyamaka
is being in non-conceptual wisdom awareness or prajna,
not falling for any of these games.
Basically a way to say this is,
don't take any relative position as if it's absolutely true.
Because all relative positions are absolutely false.
They are all distorted.
The Buddha taught this so clearly.
Conceptual mind is fundamentally distorted.
The prayer of kunden sampo,
that's the big demon in Buddhism, conceptualization.
We can use concepts to get into un-conceptual
or non-conceptual meditation.
That's the stepping stone middle way approach.
Or we can just directly try to recognize
non-dual wisdom awareness.
That's the Prasangaka Madhyamaka approach.
That's Rangthong, empty of other, or sorry,
empty of self, empty of self-identity.
The great master, Kembo Sultram Jamsaramichhe says,
Prasangaka Madhyamaka is the ultimate highest view,
philosophically, because all relative positions
are fundamentally erroneous.
If you try to establish any relative position,
it will be mistaken.
So don't establish a relative position.
Abide in ultimate truth.
They don't affirm anything.
They just establish that relative positions
are fundamentally limited.
So don't play with limited duality mind.
Recognize unlimited duality,
unlimited non-dual wisdom awareness.
Then this same great master,
Rangthong Kembo Sultram Jamsaramichhe said,
third turning shentong approach is the best technique
if you're actually gonna apply it in practice.
Say, what is it like when you're abiding in emptiness?
All these amazing qualities come up.
The 10 powers and all the fearlessnesses and omnisciences
and all these clairs, the clairvoyances
and clairaudience and clairvisual
and all these things start happening
'cause now the alaya is being purified
and what was previously blocked is unblocked
and that arises as cities.
And this is just said to be the natural state
of how mind is when it's not all gunked up
with habitual patterns.
That's why it's a definitive,
the definitive teaching is both Rangthong and shentong.
Conceptually, Prasangaka is the best one
to get us out of conceptual grasping, our hang ups,
holding on to this conceptual playground,
things that we like, our boxes, you know?
Prasangaka really shows that all these boxes are limited.
Shentong says, what's it like if we're out of the box?
No box.
What's it like?
What's the experience like?
That's why for meditators,
shentong is said to be definitive.
And then both, we need both, study and practice.
So when it comes to it,
the absolute truth is not that there's no box.
It's not that there's no self.
It's not that there's no position.
It's that all positions on the ultimate level,
absolutely speaking, all positions
are fundamentally flexible.
Their nature is emptiness.
So, Middleweight View uses what's called transcendental logic
to reveal the ultimate open, flexible, empty nature
of every single relative experience.
It doesn't turn the dream off.
It wakes us up.
It makes us lucid so we can navigate the dream
to make it a better dream for all beings.
All dream-like beings make it a good dream for all of us.
The dream will never end.
We'll never not be in a box.
But what we can be in is wisdom awareness
and then it's pure arising display,
which is called pure relative truth.
This is where the tantras begin.
So these four philosophical schools
by Vashika, Sravtantika, Mayandoni, Madhyamika,
these are all sutra.
That's the basis of tantra.
That's why the Middleweight View of Madhyamika View,
the great Madhyamika View is non-dual wisdom awareness
or prajna, wisdom inseparable with compassion.
That's how this is the foundation of tantra.
The Middleweight View leans into tantra.
It's geared forward to tantra practice.
That's what we're doing at the beginning of every session.
That's what we're trying to reintroduce
in our sadhana practice to ourselves
to abide in the Middleweight View.
That's when dissolution happens.
That's called the Middleweight View, great Madhyamika.
It could be called zogchen, mahamudra,
prajna, paramitta, shije, chud, lamdre.
Ramachas have gone over this so many times.
This is just the Buddha nature happening unobstructedly.
So in the sutras, that's how they talk about it in the sutras,
unobstructed Buddha nature.
In the tantras, they talk about it as rigpa.
Or ordinary mind.
How the mind is when it's not funneled
through all these concepts.
And then a key point here is it's not dumbing down
the mind becoming pre-conceptual.
We're not trying to be like cows.
Post-conceptual, we're trying to use concepts when necessary
to skillfully communicate with others.
But to see, that's just one way of communicating.
There's all these other ways of communicating
that the Buddha pointed towards post-conceptual,
non-conceptual, wisdom awareness.
That's what the middle way view is pointing towards.
They do that by not establishing any fixed relative position.
They let every relative position undo itself.
And what's left isn't a smoldering wasteland
of extreme relativism.
What's left is non-dual wisdom awareness.
Wisdom, that's how Buddhism is very different
than deconstructionism.
In the end, what's left when you see
that everything's relative, wisdom's left.
That's why they say Buddhas don't have consciousness.
They only have wisdom.
That's why I talk about the five wisdoms.
Buddhas don't have conceptual mind.
They can see the baby nightmares that we play with concepts.
Oh, I like this way and that way,
and I have all these narratives and designations
and preferences and colors and fashions and fads and stuff.
They see how all those baby activities we're doing.
So sad, we've done it forever.
We're gonna keep doing it forever,
unless we stop doing it.
It's sad.
The Buddhists see that, so there's such compassion.
Then they give us all these stepping stones
to just finally just to set down the burden, you know?
Just like relax the mind.
Let it just be what it naturally is
with always kind of always in its own story, you know?
So we can see how typical, mundane, common sense,
contemporary discussions on almost everything
is a lot more superficial than this.
Buddhism's not throwing that out.
Buddhism meets all of us where we are.
If we're really upset about the color of our car
or, you know, whatever, someone called us a name,
the Buddha will approach that.
It's called a no analysis.
Oh, your car's red, not brown, sorry, you know?
Genuinely, the Buddha will genuinely experience
that with compassion, not with condemnation
or not kind of some I'm better than you approach.
The middle way view meets beings exactly where they are
in their dream and just helps it.
It's just a dream, you know?
You can wake up a little more.
And when we wake up, the dream doesn't stop.
We become lucid in the dream.
Then it's not a big problem anymore.
So that's the big fundamental insight
of the mind only, or sorry, the middle way view.
All of samsara's a false problem.
There's no samsara.
There's no nirvana.
There's no path.
There's no freedom.
You can't be free if you were never trapped.
The true nature was never trapped.
It was always free.
Called great freedom, tempo, great perfection,
great completion.
We just have to recognize what we already are,
wisdom and compassion in union.
That's the path of Buddha.
That's the path the Buddha taught.
And the most direct path is just to relax and see it
and be it.
And when we don't see that,
then we need stepping stones.
We need tools to re-recognize.
And there's all these teachings
and all these paths and philosophical schools
and yanas to use.
When we let that true nature happen
and our alia or our mind,
the subtle storehouse consciousness is groundless.
The groundless ground, right?
Empty of intrinsic existence.
That doesn't have that quality.
Talked about as if it's a base, Z.
The base of all.
Ground manyamaka, the union of two truths.
Path manyamaka, the union of the two merits.
Permission manyamaka, the final total perfection
of the two bodies of rupakaya, form and formless bodies.
That's the full expression of the mind only,
or sorry, the middle way view.
The groundless ground.
How's it recognized? By awareness.
Undistorted, pristine, valid cognition.
What does relative truth do
once we start abiding in the groundless ground?
We start seeing things more purely.
That's when the tantras start.
All the skillful means of the tantras
start using kind of our pure natural qualities.
It start pouring out.
And we use them, it's so skillful.
You use conceptual pretending.
I look like this, the guru's up there.
It embodies all these things.
It comes from, you know, we go into the creation
and then it happens and the completion and it dissolves.
It uses our conceptual designation
if we're not experiencing that yet,
we're not on the boomies.
But it uses it to undo itself.
It uses our imagination to undo our conceptual fixation.
We're practicing being free.
And then we dissolve and we just let ourselves be free.
So it's so skillful like that.
And then the final Yana, the Zogchen approach,
Ata Yoga Yana, is not pretending anything.
It's not playing any conceptual games anymore.
It's letting the pure relative truth be what it is fully.
It's letting the great equality, the absolute truth
be what it is fully.
And don't do anything, undistracted, nonmeditation.
Recognize your own innate wisdom awareness,
the groundless ground.
And all these habits and things will come up
and just let them come, let them go.
Then there's all these teachings on that.
And we need the teachers to keep showing us
because we keep believing in the most obvious things
like my name's Drakpa, you know.
There's a me here.
Oh, so, you know, birth, old age, sickness, and death.
I really believe in all that.
I have a lot of suffering around that.
So we have to be kind to ourselves
and go through this path gradually.
But we can't fake ourselves out
and act like we're being big middle way view people
if we can't even talk about what does the middle way mean.
Non-dual wisdom doesn't mean no concepts.
It means isn't addicted to concepts.
A great, great master abiding in non-dual wisdom awareness
should be able to explain how reality functions
so clearly with such elaboration.
The Buddha taught so many teachings.
It didn't shut off his ability to talk.
The Buddha was fully engaged. He just wasn't addicted to it.
He wasn't stuck on one version of a dream
and then just like hammering everyone with that version.
Like we always do.
I do. I'm right. You're wrong.
Right?
That's why.
Woo, dah, dah, dah.
Now I get to say the big trigger word,
which I thought to throw in
after all this kind of illogical things
and all this really traditional Buddhist Dharma.
This is the exact same as integral approach.
Everything I just went through
proves that Nainayana system's integral post-postmodern.
It's a worldview.
It's not a historical epic
or just people who are dead and gone, you know?
This is a traditional Buddhist way to explain that worldview.
The worldview that goes past of I'm right and you're wrong.
That's called a middle way view.
It doesn't actually hold onto a fixed relative position
as if it's truly fixed.
Oh, that's that way. Okay.
I'll meet you where you're at.
How can I help from there?
Every other worldview doesn't do that.
They all believe they're right
and the other people are wrong.
Look.
Look at it.
I challenge everyone.
Pre-integral worldviews.
This isn't an elitist thing.
It's not like Ata Yoga is the only good one
and all these other yanas are bad.
That's not saying anything like that.
Pre-integral worldviews,
the fundamental belief that they all have,
I'm right, everyone else is wrong.
It's part of the operating system.
The integral worldview is the only one that stops doing that.
And then after that, it doesn't make that mistake again.
Middleweight view is the only Buddhist view
that goes beyond fixating on relative views.
And it just works with other people's positions,
whatever's helpful to them.
This is the same middleweight view.
Integral worldview is the exact same.
Theory is a different thing.
Middleweight has theory, it has experience.
Every worldview has the theory, theoretical map.
Then it has the actual experience.
But you can't be a Bodhisattva really seriously
and think you're right and everyone's wrong.
That's impossible.
It doesn't fit.
'Cause Bodhisattva approach
fundamentally believes in the middleweight view.
Prajna is the only actual answer
because every other answer really believes it's right
and all the other ones are wrong.
So that's my challenge.
If we're really serious about being Bodhisattvas,
we really have to upend our view
that I'm right and you're wrong.
It's not good enough to just do longer treat
or say some prayers a little bit
and then come out and use our Buddhist jargon
and hang out with our Buddhist friends and all that.
The world needs more than that from us.
We're talking about things beyond self, beyond other,
beyond this ism and that ism
and this tradition and that tradition.
Buddhism needs a lot more flexible beings
and the middleweight view is that flexible approach.
That's essentially the Buddhist teaching.
If we're not doing middleweight view
and we think we're doing all this Vajrayana
Tibetan Buddhism, we're really not.
We're fooling ourselves.
If we do a lot of Tibetan Buddhist practice in the end,
it doesn't really help much.
We're not doing it right.
I know, I've not done it right for a long time.
It's a challenge not just as I'm right and you're wrong.
It's, are we really in a state of mind
that actually is so caring about others' positions
that we'll like see how they are right too.
But it doesn't mean they're the right in the same way.
Prasankaka Madhyamaka on relative conventional truth
still has a spectrum of mistaken conceptual truth,
conventional truth, and unmistaken.
They still make all these designations
on the relative truth.
It's not just all relative, anything goes.
It's so refined, the view.
They just think that's all fictitious.
It's all fake, but there's some that are more accurate fake.
Some are more helpful.
There's some are more helpful Cinderella stories
as Sogsar Kentsen Rinpoche says.
But they're all provisional.
So that's my long winded thing.
And I meant this to be a little longer.
I mean, I can't possibly like go talk about middleweight view
and not go through to all the other philosophical schools
and locate it within the Nanyana system.
It's not true, you know, it's easy to say it's all space,
you know, but so what, easy breezy, you know.
Words are so easy, but when the challenge happens,
if we're not really actually coming from a place of wisdom,
we just collapse into our most convenient
habitual conceptualization.
And we lock up, and we freeze, and we fight.
That's called samsara.
It's not enough anymore for 21st century Buddhas
to just use nice, funny words,
and then we just don't really do practice,
or we do some practice, but we just do it in a way
that's not really curious,
it's not really trying to undo itself,
it's just trying to get in the time.
And then 20 years goes by, and then we say,
oh, I'm not really better or something,
the Buddhas is wrong, and Dharma is wrong,
then we blame, blame, blame, blame,
and Benhamdha Kamuramichi has talked about this a lot.
We're trying to use this time to,
this is really preventative medicine.
We need to know some of these key points.
We need to know how mind-only school is based on
Swatranthaka, is based on Vibhachaka,
and it leads to middle way, which leads to Vatriyana,
which leads to Dzogchen, which goes beyond all isms.
It's not about any system, it's just about naturalness.
But we need to clearly see with mindfulness
how we're not doing that, and we need to be kind to ourself
to see how we're not doing that, not to say, I'm perfect.
See how I keep messing up, if I'm not willing to look
at my unconscious habits, or not to ask for help,
then they're just gonna keep being the background radiation,
the operating system I just don't see,
but usually everyone else sees, and it's just forever,
and we're gonna do this samsara thing forever.
But without mind-only school, Vatriyana's a joke.
We're gonna transform all this into a mandala
that makes no sense if there's actual
physical things out there.
If we're gonna go into all this, everything arises,
there's a hyung, so there's a syllable,
which becomes a ornament, like a certain hand object,
which becomes a deity, which becomes a retinue,
which does all these activities, and eneminate,
and gather, and dissolve, and then receive blessing,
and then open awareness.
We're gonna talk about doing all that.
How could a fixed position be true,
and have that practice make any sense?
It doesn't make any sense.
I mean, it's the only way to really be in a state
of mind that doesn't fixate.
That's what we're practicing, how to not fixate,
how to be present and engaged with appearance
that's totally flexible, empty of being fixated,
not really a non-reified experience.
That's the only way to freedom.
This is the only way we can really be of benefit to others,
is really see how we keep trapping ourselves,
and actually put the time in to unlock our own blockages.
No one can do it for us.
We have everything we need to do this now,
but it takes time to digest it,
and it takes time to chew on it,
and it takes time to engage it,
and it takes vulnerability and honesty to say
when I don't know what's going on,
and I need help, and to try to be vulnerable and receive help,
and to recognize some people are way farther along the path,
and to use their guidance, and to try our best,
and then we mess up, and then we try, try again.
And at the end of that, we're gonna be free,
and then we can really help beings, really help beings.
Exactly how it makes sense to them,
not how we think they need to be helped,
but really on their own side,
what makes them a little more open?
We need the flexibility to see the real nuggets of truth
in all of these positions,
and at the same time see how they're all limited,
they're all partial.
Everything's partially true on the relative level.
It's partially false.
So this wisdom awareness of prajna,
the only way to be that flexible,
that's the only way we can be flexible enough.
Then when we're that flexible,
we really can engage partial positions
with a lot of love and tenderness and care and respect.
Otherwise we're doing this Vajrayana thing for ourselves,
it's a disaster.
I'm doing Vajrayana so I can get free.
Good luck.
Doesn't work like that.
All the philosophical schools
already refuted the existence of itself.
We can't use all these high-end Buddhist teachings
and use them from a non-Buddhist world view,
believing in all these fixed entities.
This doesn't work, it won't work,
like Zog sarkhan Sarimache also says.
If you really want to use Buddhism to just be happy
and free-flowing and stuff, just get a massage.
It makes more sense.
We're doing it to be free, not to be happy.
Then it comes in, the great blissfulness
and nature's already great bliss.
So then it's like way past happiness.
But we actually have to be in that
and not just talk about that.
So that's my kind of going through the whirlwind
of all the Nanyanas in the four philosophical schools
to try to more firmly or clearly establish
what a middle-wave view might look like,
what it might be pointing towards.
So this is all just moon pointing.
And now we'll just kind of like use that moon pointing
to just relax in our practice.
So thanks so much.
Thanks to your patience for a little bit
of a kind of longer talk, but I appreciate you.
Thank you.
Thank you all.
Thank you, friends.
Thank you.
It's such a pleasure to be here with you all.
And yeah, we all have everything in our favor now.
Beautiful human beings, beautiful opportunity,
beautiful teachings, beautiful teacher,
beautiful path, beautiful sangha.
We really have everything.
It's all laid out for us.
And so we just, wherever we are, that's where we start.
That's where we continue.
And we just keep relaxing, keep resting,
keep engaging with a really joyful heart,
with really good intention.
Give others the benefit of the doubt.
Try to see their good, their really goodness first.
Then we can have a discussion about kind of finer points
that are harder to figure out, a little more complicated.
But like try to really start with really,
oh, you're a good being.
I'm a good being, you're a good being.
I'm like, we really are in this together.
We need to work together with that.
And we need to be really kind of discerning
about what we're bringing to the conversation,
about what my mind's doing,
what my habits are doing to me,
how they're helping me, how they're hurting me,
how they're helping and hurting others too.
So that's just being a responsible practitioner
of the Buddha Dharma.
And then this summary,
I thought to give a quick summary,
to just tie it all together,
which is a very succinct first point.
Everything is impermanent.
All boils down to these tiny irreducible particles
of space, time and mind.
That's by Bhashika.
All we ever experience is our projection.
That is Sultantika.
There is only projection.
That's mind only.
Some projections are really convenient useful placeholders
to recognizing what is beyond projection,
what is not filtered through
fundamentally deceptive projection.
That's called Categorized Middleweight View.
All projections are fundamentally distorted and diluted.
So just jump into what is fundamentally undistorted
and not diluted.
Pristine Wisdom Awareness, Prashna.
It's called uncategorized Middleweight View, Prasangika.
When we abide in pristine valid cognition
of the noble ones, then we use skillful means
to gradually refine our perceptions
and habits of body and speech.
This is Outer Tantras.
Outside in body, everything we see form, sound, space,
there is nothing impure.
It's all deities doing Dharma activities,
enlightened activities in a mandala, Maha Yoga.
Everything inside is just the activities of deities
in the mandalas which fundamentally make up
our Vajrabhadi, Salong Tigle, Anu Yoga.
Everything outside, inside, conceptual mind,
non-conceptual wisdom, has always only ever been
pristine, valid cognition.
It will never be stained.
It has never been broken.
It will always be 100% perfect and pure.
This is Ahti Yoga, Sogchen.
Then when it comes down to it, Venerable Kenshin,
Paul Dinscher, Barimba Che said in his glorious book,
The Nine Golden Chariots,
the closer we look at relative truth,
the more uncertain we become.
'Cause relative truth is fabricated
and fundamentally diluted.
The closer we look at absolute ultimate truth,
the more certain we become.
Because Prajna is unmistaked, unmistaken.
Perfect, pristine, valid cognition.
Thank you, friends.
Thank you.
We can do it.
Yay, team.
Bye.